<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky’s</b> room: it is his bedroom and also his office. In the window there is a big table covered with account books and papers of all sorts; a bureau, bookcases, scales. A smaller table, for <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</b>; on that table there are paints and drawing materials; beside it a big portfolio. A cage with a starling in it. On the wall a map of Africa, obviously of no use to anyone. A big sofa covered with American leather. To the left a door leading to other apartments. On the right a door into the hall; near door, on right, there is a doormat, that the peasants may not muddy the floor. An autumn evening. Stillness.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</b> sitting opposite each other winding wool.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>You must make haste, Marina Timofeyevna, they will soon be calling us to say goodbye. They have already ordered the horses.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tries to wind more rapidly.</i> There is not much left.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>They are going to Harkov. They’ll live there.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>Much better so.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>They’ve had a fright.⁠ ⁠… Yelena Andreyevna keeps saying, “I won’t stay here another hour. Let us get away; let us get away.” “We will stay at Harkov,” she says; “we will have a look round and then send for our things.⁠ ⁠…” They are not taking much with them. It seems it is not ordained that they should live here, Marina Timofeyevna. It’s not ordained.⁠ ⁠… It’s the dispensation of Providence.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>It’s better so. Look at the quarrelling and shooting this morning⁠—a regular disgrace!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>Yes, a subject worthy of the brush of Aivazovsky.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>A shocking sight it was <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">a pause</i>. We shall live again in the old way, as we used to. We shall have breakfast at eight, dinner at one, and sit down to supper in the evening; everything as it should be, like other people⁠ ⁠… like Christians <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">with a sigh</i>. It’s a long while since I have tasted noodles, sinner that I am!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>Yes, it’s a long time since they have given us noodles at dinner <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">a pause</i>. A very long time.⁠ ⁠… As I was walking through the village this morning, Marina Timofeyevna, the man at the shop called after me, “You cadger, living upon other people.” And it did hurt me so.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>You shouldn’t take any notice of that, my dear. We all live upon God. Whether it’s you or Sonya or Ivan Petrovitch, none of you sit idle, we all work hard! All of us.⁠ ⁠… Where is Sonya?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>In the garden. She is still going round with the doctor looking for Ivan Petrovitch. They are afraid he may lay hands on himself.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>And where is his pistol?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">In a whisper.</i> I’ve hidden it in the cellar!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With a smile.</i> What goings on!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</b> from outside.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Let me alone. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</b>.</i> Go away, leave me alone⁠—if only for an hour! I won’t endure being watched.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>Certainly, Vanya <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">goes out on tiptoe</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>The gander says, <i>ga-ga-ga!</i> <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">gathers up her wool and goes out</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Let me alone!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I should be delighted to. I ought to have gone away ages ago, but I repeat I won’t go till you give back what you took from me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>I did not take anything from you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I am speaking in earnest, don’t detain me. I ought to have gone long ago.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>I took nothing from you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Both sit down.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Oh! I’ll wait a little longer and then, excuse me, I must resort to force. We shall have to tie your hands and search you. I am speaking quite seriously.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>As you please <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">a pause</i>. To have made such a fool of myself: to have fired twice and missed him! I shall never forgive myself for that.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>If you wanted to be playing with firearms, you would have done better to take a pop at yourself.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shrugging his shoulders.</i> It’s queer. I made an attempt to commit murder and I have not been arrested; no one has sent for the police. So I am looked upon as a madman <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">with a bitter laugh</i>. I am mad, but people are not mad who hide their crass stupidity, their flagrant heartlessness under the mask of a professor, a learned sage. People are not mad who marry old men and then deceive them before the eyes of everyone. I saw you kissing her! I saw!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Yes, I did kiss her, and that’s more than you ever have!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking towards the door.</i> No, the earth is mad to let you go on living on it!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Come, that’s silly.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Well, I am mad. I am not responsible. I have a right to say silly things.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>That’s a stale trick. You are not a madman: you are simply a crank. A silly fool. Once I used to look upon every crank as an invalid⁠—as abnormal; but now I think it is the normal condition of man to be a crank. You are quite normal.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Covers his face with his hands.</i> I am ashamed! If you only knew how ashamed I am! No pain can be compared with this acute shame <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">miserably</i>. It’s unbearable <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">bends over the table</i>. What am I to do? What am I to do?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Nothing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Give me something! Oh, my God! I am forty-seven. If I live to be sixty, I have another thirteen years. It’s a long time! How am I to get through those thirteen years? What shall I do? How am I to fill them up? Oh, you know⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">squeezing <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov’s</b> hand convulsively</i>; you know, if only one could live the remnant of one’s life in some new way. Wake up on a still sunny morning and feel that one had begun a new life, that all the past was forgotten and had melted away like smoke <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">weeps</i>. To begin a new life.⁠ ⁠… Tell me how to begin it⁠ ⁠… what to begin.⁠ ⁠…</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With vexation.</i> Oh, get away with you! New life, indeed! Our position⁠—yours and mine⁠—is hopeless.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Yes?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I am convinced of it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Give me something.⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pointing to his heart.</i> I have a scalding pain here.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shouts angrily.</i> Leave off! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Softening.</i> Those who will live a hundred or two hundred years after us, and who will despise us for having lived our lives so stupidly and tastelessly⁠—they will, perhaps, find a means of being happy; but we⁠ ⁠… There is only one hope for you and me. The hope that when we are asleep in our graves we may, perhaps, be visited by pleasant visions <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">with a sigh</i>. Yes, old man, in the whole district there were only two decent, well-educated men: you and I. And in some ten years the common round of the trivial life here has swamped us, and has poisoned our life with its putrid vapours, and made us just as despicable as all the rest. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Eagerly.</i> But don’t try to put me off: give me what you took away from me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>I took nothing from you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>You took a bottle of morphia out of my travelling medicine-chest <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">a pause</i>. Look here, if you insist on making an end of yourself, go into the forest and shoot yourself. But give me back the morphia or else there will be talk and conjecture. People will think I have given it you. It will be quite enough for me to have to make your postmortem. Do you think I shall find it interesting?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Leave me alone.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b>.</i> Sofya Alexandrovna, your uncle has taken a bottle of morphia out of my medicine-chest, and won’t give it back. Tell him that it’s⁠ ⁠… really stupid. And I haven’t the time to waste. I ought to be going.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>Uncle Vanya, did you take the morphia? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A pause.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>He did. I am certain of it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>Give it back. Why do you frighten us? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tenderly.</i> Give it back, Uncle Vanya! I am just as unhappy, perhaps, as you are; but I am not going to give way to despair. I am bearing it, and will bear it, till my life ends of itself.⁠ ⁠… You must be patient too <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">a pause</i>. Give it back! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses his hands.</i> Dear, good uncle, darling! give it back! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Weeps.</i> You are kind, you will have pity on us and give it back. Be patient, uncle!⁠—be patient!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes the bottle out of the table-drawer and gives it to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</b>.</i> There, take it! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b>.</i> But we must make haste and work, make haste and do something, or else I can’t⁠ ⁠… I can’t bear it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>Yes, yes, work. As soon as we have seen our people off, we’ll sit down to work. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Nervously turning over the papers on the table.</i> We have let everything go.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Puts the bottle into his case and tightens the straps.</i> Now I can set off.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>Ivan Petrovitch, are you here? We are just starting. Go to Alexandr, he wants to say something to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>Go, Uncle Vanya. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</b> by the arm.</i> Let us go. Father and you must be reconciled. That’s essential.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</b> go out.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>I am going away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</b> her hand.</i> Goodbye.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Already?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>The carriage is waiting.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Goodbye.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>You promised me today that you would go away.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I remember. I am just going <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">a pause</i>. You have taken fright? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes her hand.</i> Is it so terrible?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>Yes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>You had better stay, after all! What do you say? Tomorrow in the plantation⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>No. It’s settled. And I look at you so fearlessly just because it is settled. I have only one favour to ask of you: think better of me. I should like you to have a respect for me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Ugh! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Makes a gesture of impatience.</i> Do stay, I ask you to. Do recognise, you have nothing to do in this world, you have no object in life, you have nothing to occupy your mind, and sooner or later you will give way to feeling⁠—it’s inevitable. And it had better not be at Harkov, or somewhere in Kursk, but here, in the lap of nature.⁠ ⁠… It’s poetical, anyway, even the autumn is beautiful.⁠ ⁠… There is the forest plantation here, half-ruined homesteads in the Turgenev style.⁠ ⁠…</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>How absurd you are.⁠ ⁠… I am angry with you, but yet⁠ ⁠… I shall think of you with pleasure. You are an interesting, original man. We shall never meet again, and so⁠—why conceal it?⁠—I was really a little bit in love with you. Come, let us shake hands and part friends. Don’t remember evil against me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pressing her hand.</i> Yes, you had better go⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">musing</i>. You seem to be a good, warmhearted creature, and yet there is something strange about your whole personality, as it were. You came here with your husband, and all of us who were at work, toiling and creating something, had to fling aside our work and attend to nothing all the summer but your husband’s gout and you. The two of you have infected all of us with your idleness. I was attracted by you and have done nothing for a whole month, and, meanwhile, people have been ill, and the peasants have pastured their cattle in my woods, of young, half-grown trees.⁠ ⁠… And so, wherever you and your husband go, you bring destruction everywhere.⁠ ⁠… I am joking, of course, yet⁠ ⁠… it is strange. And I am convinced that if you had stayed here, the devastation would have been immense. I should have been done for⁠ ⁠… and you wouldn’t have fared well either! Well, go away. <i xml:lang="it">Finita la comedia!</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Taking a pencil from his table and hurriedly putting it in her pocket.</i> I shall take this pencil as a keepsake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>It is strange.⁠ ⁠… We have been friends and all at once for some reason⁠ ⁠… we shall never meet again. So it is with everything in this world.⁠ ⁠… While there is no one here⁠—before Uncle Vanya comes in with a nosegay⁠—allow me to kiss you at parting.⁠ ⁠… Yes? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her on the cheek.</i> That’s right.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>I wish you all happiness. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks round.</i> Well, so be it! For once in my life! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Embraces him impulsively and both simultaneously draw rapidly apart from each other.</i> I must go⁠—I must go!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Make haste and go. Since the carriage is there, you had better set off.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td>There’s someone coming, I believe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Both listen.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>
							<i xml:lang="it">Finita!</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Serebryakov</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marya Vassilyevna</b>, with a book; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Serebryakov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</b>.</i> Let bygones be bygones. After what has happened, I have gone through and experienced so much in these few hours, that I believe I could write a whole treatise on the art of living for the benefit of posterity. I gladly accept your apologies and apologise myself. Goodbye! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</b> kiss each other three times.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>You shall receive regularly the same sum as hitherto. Everything shall be as before.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena Andreyevna</b> embraces <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Serebryakov</td>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marya Vassilyevna’s</b> hand.</i>
							<i xml:lang="fr">Maman.⁠ ⁠…</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marya</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kissing him.</i> Alexandr, have your photograph taken again and send it to me. You know how dear you are to me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>Goodbye, your Excellency! Don’t forget us!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Serebryakov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kissing his daughter.</i> Goodbye goodbye, everyone. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shaking hands with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</b>.</i> Thanks for your pleasant company. I respect your way of thinking, your enthusiasms, your impulses, but permit an old man to add one observation to his farewell message: you must work, my friends! you must work! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He bows to them all.</i> I wish you all things good!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes out, followed by <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marya Vassilyevna</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Warmly kisses <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena Andreyevna’s</b> hand.</i> Goodbye.⁠ ⁠… Forgive me.⁠ ⁠… We shall never meet again.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Yelena</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Moved.</i> Goodbye, dear Ivan Petrovitch <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">kisses him on the head and goes out</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</b>.</i> Waffles, tell them, by the way, to bring my carriage round too.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</td>
						<td>Certainly, my dear soul <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">goes out</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Only <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</b> remain.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Clearing his paints from the table and putting them away in his portmanteau.</i> Why don’t you go and see them off?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Let them go, I⁠ ⁠… I can’t. My heart is too heavy. I must make haste and occupy myself with something.⁠ ⁠… Work! Work! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rummages among his papers on the table.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A pause; there is the sound of bells.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>They’ve gone. The Professor is glad, I’ll be bound. Nothing will tempt him back.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enters.</i> They’ve gone <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">sits down in an easy chair and knits her stocking</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enters.</i> They’ve gone <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">wipes her eyes</i>. Good luck to them. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To her uncle.</i> Well, Uncle Vanya, let us do something.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Work, work.⁠ ⁠…</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>It’s ever so long since we sat at this table together <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">lights the lamp on the table</i>. I believe there is no ink <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">takes the inkstand, goes to the cupboard, and fills it with ink</i>. But I feel sad that they have gone.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marya Vassilyevna</b> comes in slowly.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marya</td>
						<td>They’ve gone <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">sits down and becomes engrossed in reading</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sits down to the table and turns over the pages of the account book.</i> First of all, Uncle Vanya, let us make out our accounts. We’ve neglected it all dreadfully. Someone sent for his account again today. Make it out. If you will do one account, I will do another.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes.</i> “Delivered⁠ ⁠… to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>⁠ ⁠…”<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Both write in silence.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Yawning.</i> I am ready for bye-bye.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>How quiet it is! The pens scratch and the cricket churrs. It’s warm and snug. I don’t want to go. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">There is the sound of bells.</i> There are my horses.⁠ ⁠… There is nothing left for me but to say goodbye to you, my friends⁠—to say goodbye to my table⁠—and be off! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Packs up his maps in the portfolio.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>Why are you in such a hurry? You might as well stay.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I can’t.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes.</i> “Account delivered, two roubles and seventy-five kopecks.”</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Labourer</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Labourer</td>
						<td>Mihail Lvovitch, the horses are ready.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I heard them. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Hands him the medicine-chest, the portmanteau and the portfolio.</i> Here, take these. Mind you don’t crush the portfolio.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Labourer</td>
						<td>Yes, sir.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Well? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes to say goodbye.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>When shall we see you again?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>Not before next summer, I expect. Hardly in the winter.⁠ ⁠… Of course, if anything happens, you’ll let me know, and I’ll come <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">shakes hands</i>. Thank you for your hospitality, for your kindness⁠—for everything, in fact. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes up to nurse and kisses her on the head.</i> Goodbye, old woman.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>You are not going without tea?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I don’t want any, nurse.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>Perhaps you’ll have a drop of vodka?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Irresolutely.</i> Perhaps.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</b> goes out.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">After a pause.</i> My trace-horse has gone a little lame. I noticed it yesterday when Petrushka was taking it to water.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>You must change his shoes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>I shall have to call in at the blacksmith’s in Rozhdestvennoye. It can’t be helped. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes up to the map of Africa and looks at it.</i> I suppose in that Africa there the heat must be something terrific now!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td>Yes, most likely.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Comes back with a tray on which there is a glass of vodka and a piece of bread.</i> There you are.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</b> drinks the vodka.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>To your good health, my dear <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">makes a low bow</i>. You should eat some bread with it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Astrov</td>
						<td>No, I like it as it is. And now, good luck to you all. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</b>.</i> Don’t come out, nurse, there is no need.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He goes out; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b> follows with a candle, to see him off; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</b> sits in her easy chair.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes.</i> “February the second, Lenten oil, twenty pounds. February sixteenth, Lenten oil again, twenty pounds. Buckwheat⁠ ⁠…” <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A pause.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The sound of bells.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td>He has gone <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">a pause</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Comes back and puts the candle on the table.</i> He has gone.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Counts on the beads and writes down.</i> “Total⁠ ⁠… fifteen⁠ ⁠… twenty-five⁠ ⁠…”</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b> sits down and writes.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Yawns.</i> Lord have mercy on us!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</b> comes in on tiptoe, sits by the door and softly tunes the guitar.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Voynitsky</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</b>, passing his hand over her hair.</i> My child, how my heart aches! Oh, if only you knew how my heart aches!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>There is nothing for it. We must go on living! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A pause.</i> We shall go on living, Uncle Vanya! We shall live through a long, long chain of days and weary evenings; we shall patiently bear the trials which fate sends us; we shall work for others, both now and in our old age, and have no rest; and when our time comes we shall die without a murmur, and there beyond the grave we shall say that we have suffered, that we have wept, that life has been bitter to us, and God will have pity on us, and you and I, uncle, dear uncle, shall see a life that is bright, lovely, beautiful. We shall rejoice and look back at these troubles of ours with tenderness, with a smile⁠—and we shall rest. I have faith, uncle; I have fervent, passionate faith. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Slips on her knees before him and lays her head on his hands; in a weary voice.</i> We shall rest!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</b> softly plays on the guitar.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>We shall rest! We shall hear the angels; we shall see all Heaven lit with radiance; we shall see all earthly evil, all our sufferings, drowned in mercy which will fill the whole world, and our life will be peaceful, gentle and sweet as a caress. I have faith, I have faith <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">wipes away his tears with her handkerchief</i>. Poor Uncle Vanya, you are crying. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Through her tears.</i> You have had no joy in your life, but wait, Uncle Vanya, wait. We shall rest <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">puts her arms round him</i>. We shall rest! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The watchman taps.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Telyegin</b> plays softly; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marya Vassilyevna</b> makes notes on the margin of her pamphlet; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marina</b> knits her stocking.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sonya</td>
						<td>We shall rest!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Curtain drops slowly.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
